Spec for machine readable json output for dotnet list package (#11446)
NuGet/Home: proposed/2021/MachineReadableOutput.md

    [--include-prerelease] [--include-transitive] [--interactive]
    [--outdated] [--source <SOURCE>] [-v|--verbosity <LEVEL>]
    [--vulnerable]
    [--format <FORMAT>]

dotnet list package -h|--help
```

`<FORMAT>` - Allowed values as part of spec is `json`. (In the future `parseable`, `yaml` could be candidates.)

#### `> dotnet list package`

```dotnetcli
Project 'MyProjectA' has the following package references
   [netcoreapp3.1]:
   Top-level Package                      Requested             Resolved
   > Microsoft.Extensions.Primitives      [1.0.0, 5.0.0]        1.0.0
   > NuGet.Commands                       4.8.0-preview3.5278   4.8.0-preview3.5278
   > Text2Xml.Lib                         [1.1.2, 2.0.0)        1.1.2

Project 'MyProjectB' has the following package references
   [netcoreapp3.1]:
   Top-level Package      Requested             Resolved
   > NuGet.Commands       4.8.0-preview3.5278   4.8.0-preview3.5278
   > Text2Xml.Lib         1.1.2                 1.1.2

   [net5.0]:
   Top-level Package      Requested             Resolved
   > NuGet.Commands       4.8.0-preview3.5278   4.8.0-preview3.5278
   > Text2Xml.Lib         1.1.2                 1.1.2
```

> #### `> dotnet list package --format json`

Author: Continuation of https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/11446#discussion_r766997832

Currently I implemented as `--format <blah>`.

  * Making the output machine-readable unlocks additional tooling and automation scenarios in CI/CD pipeline above scenarios.

## Who are the customers

Anyone (government/private enterprises, security experts, individual contributors) who wants to consume `dotnet list package` output for auditing tool or historic keeping, CI/CD orchestrating.

## Explanation

### Functional explanation

<!-- Explain the proposal as if it were already implemented and you're teaching it to another person. -->
<!-- Introduce new concepts, functional designs with real life examples, and low-fidelity mockups or  pseudocode to show how this proposal would look. -->

#### `--format` option

Ability to use new `--format` option for all `dotnet list package` commands to ensure formatted(JSON etc) output is emitted to the console.

```dotnetcli
dotnet list [<PROJECT>|<SOLUTION>] package [--config <SOURCE>]
    [--deprecated]
    [--framework <FRAMEWORK>] [--highest-minor] [--highest-patch]
    [--include-prerelease] [--include-transitive] [--interactive]
    [--outdated] [--source <SOURCE>] [-v|--verbosity <LEVEL>]
    [--vulnerable]
    [--format <FORMAT>]

dotnet list package -h|--help
```

> `<FORMAT>` - Allowed values as part of spec is `json`. (In the future `parseable`, `csv`, `yaml`, `xml` could be candidates.)

Reviewer: Should the default format (i.e. plain text) be one of the options here?

Author: `plain text` can be passed to.

Author: I just included.

#### `> dotnet list package`

```dotnetcli
Project 'MyProjectA' has the following package references
   [netcoreapp3.1]:
   Top-level Package                      Requested             Resolved
   > Microsoft.Extensions.Primitives      [1.0.0, 5.0.0]        1.0.0
   > NuGet.Commands                       4.8.0-preview3.5278   4.8.0-preview3.5278
   > Text2Xml.Lib                         [1.1.2, 2.0.0)        1.1.2

Project 'MyProjectB' has the following package references
   [netcoreapp3.1]:
   Top-level Package      Requested             Resolved
   > NuGet.Commands       4.8.0-preview3.5278   4.8.0-preview3.5278
   > Text2Xml.Lib         1.1.2                 1.1.2

   [net5.0]:
   Top-level Package      Requested             Resolved
   > NuGet.Commands       4.8.0-preview3.5278   4.8.0-preview3.5278
   > Text2Xml.Lib         1.1.2                 1.1.2
```

#### `> dotnet list package --format json`

```json
{
  "version": 1,

>   "MyProjectA": [

Reviewer 2: What happens if I name my project `version`? Perhaps nest projects' information in a `project` node, as otherwise this may make it difficult for us to add additional properties in the future.

For example:

```json
{
  "version": 1,
  "projects": {
    "MyProjectA": [ ... ]
  }
}
```

Reviewer 2: Another concern with the current format is it may make it difficult to parse the JSON to find all projects in a way that's resilient to format changes. If there's an unknown property, how do I know if this is a project or a new property that was added to the JSON format?

Author: Great point. Just addressed. Please check.

    {
      "framework": "netcoreapp3.1",
      "topLevelPackages": [
        {
          "id": "Microsoft.Extensions.Primitives",
          "requestedVersion": "[1.0.0, 5.0.0]",

>           "resolvedVersion": "1.0.0"

Reviewer 2: Should we include some sort of hash or package source used to restore the package? A package ID and version may have different content across different package sources. In other words, the package ID + version does not actually capture which package your project depends on.

Reviewer 2: Keep in mind of dependency confusion attacks that .NET is susceptible to. We should consider making this information visible to help prevent these attacks

Reviewer 3: While it's interesting from a "I want to know as much as possible" point of view, wouldn't customers that care about package hashes use lock files, and then they don't need write their own tooling to parse this command's json and handle it themselves?

In any case, I think it's scope creep for this spec (provide json output for existing features), so can be requested in a new issue, where customers can upvote and provide feedback about why it's important to them.

        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

#### `> dotnet list package --deprecated`

```dotnetcli
The following sources were used:
   https://api.nuget.org/v3/index.json
   https://apidev.nugettest.org/v3-index/index.json

Project `MyProjectA` has the following deprecated packages
   [netcoreapp3.1]:
   Top-level Package                 Requested   Resolved   Reason(s)   Alternative
   > EntityFramework.MappingAPI      *           6.2.1      Legacy      Z.EntityFramework.Extensions >= 0.0.0
   > NuGet.Core                      2.13.0      2.13.0     Legacy

Project `MyProjectB` has the following deprecated packages
   [netcoreapp3.1]:
   Top-level Package      Requested   Resolved   Reason(s)   Alternative
   > NuGet.Core           2.13.0      2.13.0     Legacy

   [net5.0]:
   Top-level Package      Requested   Resolved   Reason(s)   Alternative
   > NuGet.Core           2.13.0      2.13.0     Legacy
```

#### `> dotnet list package --deprecated --format json`

```json
{
  "version": 1,
   "sources": [
    "https://api.nuget.org/v3/index.json",
    "https://apidev.nugettest.org/v3-index/index.json"
  ],
  "MyProjectA": [
    {
      "framework": "netcoreapp3.1",

>       "topLevelPackages": [

Reviewer 2: How would this format evolve if we add another "package pivot" in addition to top level and transitive packages? For example, what if we add new package kinds for source generators, Roslyn analyzers, etc...?

What are your thoughts of merging `topLevelPackages` and `transitivePackages` into a single property, like `dependencies`? For example, before:

```json
"topLevelPackages": [
  {
    "id": "MyTop",
     ...
  }
],
"transitivePackages": [
  {
    "id": "MyTransitive",
     ...
  }
]
```

 After:

```json
"dependencies": [
  {
    "id": "MyTop",
    "transitive": false,
     ...
  },
  {
    "id": "MyTransitive",
    "transitive": true,
     ...
  }
],
```

Author: I have no strong opinion at this time. 
I believe `versioning` can help us with dealing changes. Please check thread on it  
[#r766750418](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/11446/files#r766750418)

Reviewer 2: What are your thoughts of merging `topLevelPackages` and `transitivePackages` into a single property?

Author: @loic-sharma 
At this moment I believe `json` output be "1:1" representation of `text` output, otherwise it would be hard to reason for broader usage case, of course I could be wrong. Currently I don't know how `source generators, Roslyn analyzers` play out. Maybe if it really evolves over time, then `versioning` should come into play.

Reviewer 3: > At this moment I believe json output be "1:1" representation of text output

Why are we making this assumption? I feel like it will deliver features that customers don't want. Of what practical use is `dotnet list package --format json` without at least one of `--include-transitive`, `--deprecated`, `--vulnerable`, or `--outdated`?

As I brought up elsewhere in this PR, but I strongly believe that customers are going to want both deprecated and vulnerability information, if not outdated as well, in a single output without being forced to call the command 3 times. For anything that can be added later without introducing a break change, I fully accept we can deliver an MVP. But for anything that will require a breaking change, customers are going to use this like an API, not an interactive tool, so I disagree that it's acceptable to customers for us to break the output in future versions of the tool.

Author: > > At this moment I believe json output be "1:1" representation of text output
> 
> Why are we making this assumption? I feel like it will deliver features that customers don't want. Of what practical use is `dotnet list package --format json` without at least one of `--include-transitive`, `--deprecated`, `--vulnerable`, or `--outdated`?

> 
> As I brought up elsewhere in this PR, but I strongly believe that customers are going to want both deprecated and vulnerability information, if not outdated as well, in a single output without being forced to call the command 3 times. For anything that can be added later without introducing a break change, I fully accept we can deliver an MVP. But for anything that will require a breaking change, customers are going to use this like an API, not an interactive tool, so I disagree that it's acceptable to customers for us to break the output in future versions of the tool.

Merging them is it's possible design, currently I'm still not convinced why this design it better than current one. 
Nothing prevents customer doing `dotnet list package --include-transitive --vulnerable --format json`. 
If you are talking about include options by default then it's out of scope, I have tracking issue for it : https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/11550
, https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/11551
Also, this overlaps  with `dotnet audit` spec too.

Author: Discussed offline. Out of scope for now.

#### `> dotnet list package`

```dotnetcli
Project 'MyProjectA' has the following package references
   [netcoreapp3.1]:
   Top-level Package                      Requested             Resolved
   > Microsoft.Extensions.Primitives      [1.0.0, 5.0.0]        1.0.0
   > NuGet.Commands                       4.8.0-preview3.5278   4.8.0-preview3.5278
   > Text2Xml.Lib                         [1.1.2, 2.0.0)        1.1.2

Project 'MyProjectB' has the following package references
   [netcoreapp3.1]:
   Top-level Package      Requested             Resolved
   > NuGet.Commands       4.8.0-preview3.5278   4.8.0-preview3.5278
   > Text2Xml.Lib         1.1.2                 1.1.2

   [net5.0]:
   Top-level Package      Requested             Resolved
   > NuGet.Commands       4.8.0-preview3.5278   4.8.0-preview3.5278
   > Text2Xml.Lib         1.1.2                 1.1.2
```

#### `> dotnet list package --format json`

```json
{
  "version": 1,
  "projects": {
    "MyProjectA": [
      {
        "framework": "netcoreapp3.1",
        "topLevelPackages": [
          {
            "id": "Microsoft.Extensions.Primitives",
            "requestedVersion": "[1.0.0, 5.0.0]",

>             "resolvedVersion": "1.0.0"

Reviewer 4: This is a bit outside the scope of this spec but as someone who has had to do a decent amount of vuln hunting within nuget dependencies. Having a route to *why* this version is resolved (which dep is causing specific versions to be picked) would be a godsend. 

I'm not sure of the feasibility of getting it *here* but for the use case of transitive vuln hunting (especially for stuff from external tools like jfrog xray) it would be nice if resolved version had a reference to the lib that was constraining it. 

```json
            "id": "Microsoft.Extensions.Primitives",
            "requestedVersion": "[1.0.0, 5.0.0]",
            "resolvedVersion": "1.0.0",
            "resolvedVia" : {
              "id": "(SomeTransitivePackageId|Microsoft.Extensions.Primitives|????)"
            }
```

Author: Thank you for your input.
I feel for initial version I believe it's out of scope, probably we can consider in the future.

Author: Follow up question https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/11552

                                                 High       https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-j3g9-6fx5-gjv7
                                                 High       https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-xx3h-j3cx-8qfj
                                                 Moderate   https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-5whq-j5qg-wjvp
```

### `> dotnet list package --vulnerable --format json`

```json
{
  "version": 1,
   "sources": [
    "https://api.nuget.org/v3/index.json",
    "https://apidev.nugettest.org/v3-index/index.json"
  ],
  "projects": {
    "MyProjectA": [
      {
        "framework": "netcoreapp3.1",
        "topLevelPackages": [
          {
            "id": "DotNetNuke.Core",
            "requestedVersion": "6.0.0",
            "resolvedVersion": "6.0.0",
            "vulnerabilities" : [
              {
                  "severity":"High",
                  "advisoryurl":"https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-g8j6-m4p7-5rfq"
              },
              {
                  "severity":"Moderate",
                  "advisoryurl":"https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-v76m-f5cx-8rg4"
              },

>   ...

Reviewer 4: nit: If you want to include '...' you can do so with a comment (though the code blocks will have to be '\```json5' or \```jsonc instead of '```json' and it would get rid of the angry red background here

Author: It appears on raw md, once rendered ok.

"--parsable" option needs separate spec.
* Currently license info is not emitted from any cli command, it could be quite useful, we should consider in the future.

## Rationale and alternatives
Currently, no other `dotnet command` implemented this, this is the 1st time dotnet command implementing `json`(etc) output, so it could become example for others next time they implement.
Please note, except "tab completion" (for dotnet) part all changes would be inside NuGet.Client repo(under NuGet.Core), and risk of introducing regression is low.(`--format text` refactoring related changes only come into my mind.), no impact on dotnet sdk.

## Prior Art

<!-- What prior art, both good and bad are related to this proposal? -->
<!-- Do other features exist in other ecosystems and what experience have their community had? -->
<!-- What lessons from other communities can we learn from? -->
<!-- Are there any resources that are relevent to this proposal? -->

* https://github.com/NuGet/Home/blob/dotnet-audit/proposed/2021/DotNetAudit.md#dotnet-audit---json

* https://github.com/NuGet/Home/wiki/%5BSpec%5D-Machine-readable-output-for-dotnet-list-package

## Unresolved Questions

> * Chris: One problem is most `dotnet list package` options outputs are exclusive and have to query separately and join result to get full picture. Both below approach require additional work.

Reviewer 4: Not that I necessarily disagree with the utility of this but I think they're very different use cases from the ideas behind this spec. 

If we're talking _archiving_ I don't care about/need deprecated, outdated and vulnerable things singled out specifically though if those attributes were included then it wouldn't be a negative. I'd say that unless there's a reason not to then those should just always be included as properties with top level filters to trim it down. 

To be honest the default for the list seems like it would be better including the --include-transitive flag:
```sh
> dotnet list package
```
```jsonc

        "framework": "net5.0",
        "topLevelPackages": [ 
          {
            "id": "NuGet.Commands",
            "requestedVersion": "4.8.0-preview3.5278",
            "resolvedVersion": "4.8.0-preview3.5278",
            "deprecationInfo": { 
              "isDeprecated" : (true|false), //Dealers choice on this or just omitting the depInfo key
              "alternative(s?)" : []
            },
           "vulnerabilityInfo": {
              "isVulnerable": (true|false), //Dealers choice on this or just omitting the vulnInfo key
              "fixedIn": "nugetVersionSpec",
              "severity": "sevLevel",
              "CveReferences": ["0..n x {cve-ref-obj}"]
           }
          },
          {
            "id": "Text2Xml.Lib",
            "requestedVersion": "1.1.2",
            "resolvedVersion": "1.1.2"
          }
        ],
        "transitivePackages": [
          {
            "id": "Microsoft.CSharp",
            "resolvedVersion": "4.0.1"
            //Same info here
          },
          {
            "id": "Microsoft.NETCore.Platforms",
            "resolvedVersion": "1.1.0"
            //Same info here
          },
```

With the properties that are currently accessible only via flags included and then dotnet list package --outdated or similar just filtering down the graph for specific use cases. Generally I'd  assume that the cases where I'm going to want to filter are going to be different than the cases I want to archive so it might be good to think of it as three different stories.

- As an appsec team I want to be able to archive the dependencies that I'm shipping with a version of a product so that *if* something comes up later I can track down where it is used.
- As a developer I want to find packages that are deprecated or out of date so that I can update to known good alternatives or to newer versions when they exist.
- As a (developer|appsec) I want to determine if there are any known vulnerabilities that nuget knows about in my deps so that I can remediate them

  * dotnet cli needs an all up `dotnet list package --all` that shows all deprecated, vulnerable, and outdated top level and transitive packages. [r766860629](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/11446#discussion_r766860629)
  * Alternatively the behavior of --outdated and --deprecated could be additive rather than exclusive. That adds to the scope of this work though.[r766860629](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/11446#discussion_r766860629). With this approach we can have single schema to populate.

* Donnie: When I want to create archival records, will I want something more unique than the project name?

> Adding the path, repo, commit ID, etc seems complex. [r766920783](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/11446#discussion_r766920783)

Reviewer 4: I mentioned this one before but I'd argue that augmenting with anything that isn't local to the project system would be a bad call and should likely be left to consumers of the API. You all have enough work already :P

  * `name/relative path to solution` could be solution here.

* Donnie: How can we record in the output that --include-transitive wasn't used here?
In other words, if I look at this output years from now, how would I know whether any transitives were in this project? [r766924390](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/11446#discussion_r766924390)
  * packages.lock.json format could be used here.  

> * Loïc : Should `dotnet list package` include hashes or package source for each dependency? The package ID and version isn't globally unique across package sources?

Reviewer 4: > package source

This is probably a good idea. The issue with hashes is a really good point re:re-signing. Does that happen often? If it does are hashes published for previous versions of re-signed packages in vuln reports or similar from the msft side?

> The package ID and version isn't globally unique across package sources

In this case is there really anything you can do? I mean technically there isn't even strong consistency within a single package source if we're already in the realm of mismanaging them. If a local nuget server admin nukes a package and then allows republishing of a second one I think at that it's a bit of 'you're on your own' territory and that's on the consumer of that package. 

AFAIK that's not a workflow nuget really supports (I could be wrong). I feel like if you're publishing the same version of a package with different contents in two places you're implicitly accepting that you're outside the safe zone. That being said I think that the package source + the file hash wouldn't be a bad idea to include.

I think that the mismanagement of nuget servers isn't something that the nuget team can/should care about but providing more information in the output is probably better. The re-signing one is the only one that really gives me the heebies because it could potentially give you a false sense of security re:vulns etc but it might be something that has to be solved by external tooling.

"--parsable" option needs separate spec.
* Currently license info is not emitted from any cli command, it could be quite useful, we should consider in the future.

## Rationale and alternatives
Currently, no other `dotnet command` implemented this, this is the 1st time dotnet command implementing `json`(etc) output, so it could become example for others next time they implement.
Please note, except "tab completion" (for dotnet) part all changes would be inside NuGet.Client repo(under NuGet.Core), and risk of introducing regression is low.(`--format text` refactoring related changes only come into my mind.), no impact on dotnet sdk.

## Prior Art

<!-- What prior art, both good and bad are related to this proposal? -->
<!-- Do other features exist in other ecosystems and what experience have their community had? -->
<!-- What lessons from other communities can we learn from? -->
<!-- Are there any resources that are relevent to this proposal? -->

* https://github.com/NuGet/Home/blob/dotnet-audit/proposed/2021/DotNetAudit.md#dotnet-audit---json

* https://github.com/NuGet/Home/wiki/%5BSpec%5D-Machine-readable-output-for-dotnet-list-package

> ## Unresolved Questions

Reviewer 3: @erdembayar what's your intention with the questions in this section?

I see "Unresolved questions" as a useful discussion starting point when creating the first draft of a design spec, but ideally should be resolved (and therefore removed from this section of the markdown) before the spec is accepted (PR is merged). However, you're going in the opposite direction with adding commits that add more questions to this list.

It does make it easier to find, since GitHub does a poor job at tracking comments and will collapse/hide them when there are too many. But these are duplications of comments already in the PR, and I don't understand what the plan is to get approval for this design spec, ready for someone to implement.

Unresolved questions that can be resolved later are ok, but unresolved questions that block the MVP mean the spec isn't ready to be accepted/merged.

Author: Thank you for feedback. I'm planning to have meeting on this then we can discuss what matters then start revolving/removing them from this section.

> It does make it easier to find, since GitHub does a poor job at tracking comments and will collapse/hide them when there are too many. But these are duplications of comments already in the PR, and I don't understand what the plan is to get approval for this design spec, ready for someone to implement.

Yes, tracking comments in Github is hard.  I just to have concise list of what need to be addressed for meeting. Otherwise, there're so many comments hard to grasp what is resolved and what is not, hard to navigate.

Author: I'll remove this section soon after having discussion on each.

* https://github.com/NuGet/Home/wiki/%5BSpec%5D-Machine-readable-output-for-dotnet-list-package Basic idea from this spec is still same here and I extended from it. In current spec more orient to `dotnet style syntax` and cover more uses cases like `dotnet list package --vulnerable --format json` and `--include-transitive`, also json schema improved to include project name/identifier for multi-project scenario which would most likely use case.

## Unresolved Questions

* Chris: One problem is most `dotnet list package` options outputs are exclusive and have to query separately and join result to get full picture. Both below approach require additional work.
  * dotnet cli needs an all up `dotnet list package --all` that shows all deprecated, vulnerable, and outdated top level and transitive packages. [r766860629](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/11446#discussion_r766860629)

>   * Alternatively the behavior of --outdated and --deprecated could be additive rather than exclusive. That adds to the scope of this work though.[r766860629](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/11446#discussion_r766860629). With this approach we can have single schema to populate.

Author: @nkolev92 
What is preventing `--outdated` and `--deprecated` being additive rather than exclusive? I saw spec is designed this way, but it doesn't really explain why. Is there technical reason?

Reviewer 5: Deprecated and outdated are both filters, so it just raises too many questions

What does --outdated + --deprecated do?

Packages that are both outdated and deprecated? 
Packages that are either outdated or deprecated? 

The way the oudated output is created today, you don't really get information about the other packages. 
The deprecated output shape is slightly different.

Reviewer 6: Perhaps these questions shouldn't be answered today. They also are questions that I hope https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/11549 answers more. I don't think it's very intuitive to have an `--all` for a list command. The list command can list stuff and the audit command can audit stuff.

   https://apidev.nugettest.org/v3-index/index.json

Project `MyProjectA` has the following updates to its packages
   [netcoreapp3.1]:
   Top-level Package                      Requested             Resolved              Latest
   > Microsoft.Extensions.Primitives      [1.0.0, 5.0.0]        1.0.0                 6.0.0
   > NuGet.Commands                       4.8.0-preview3.5278   4.8.0-preview3.5278   6.0.0
   > Text2Xml.Lib                         [1.1.2, 2.0.0)        1.1.2                 1.1.4

Project `MyProjectB` has the following updates to its packages
   [netcoreapp3.1]:
   Top-level Package      Requested             Resolved              Latest
   > NuGet.Commands       4.8.0-preview3.5278   4.8.0-preview3.5278   6.0.0
   > Text2Xml.Lib         1.1.2                 1.1.2                 1.1.4

   [net5.0]:
   Top-level Package      Requested             Resolved              Latest
   > NuGet.Commands       4.8.0-preview3.5278   4.8.0-preview3.5278   6.0.0
   > Text2Xml.Lib         1.1.2                 1.1.2                 1.1.4
```

#### `> dotnet list package --outdated --format json`

```json
{
  "version": 1,
  "parameters": "--outdated",

>    "sources": [

Reviewer 7: in several of these JSON examples I see the sources listed - how does the Package Source Mapping feature interact with these listings?

Author: Without `Package Source Mapping` is not enabled then the package may come from any of those sources, but if it's enabled it only downloaded from specified source. Yes, you're right we may need to include that filtering info to be more precise. 
I created follow up issue https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/11557
I don't believe we'll include anything about package source mapping for this iteration.
Another overlapping idea is: https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/11552

## Who are the customers

Anyone (government/private enterprises, security experts, individual contributors) who wants to consume `dotnet list package` output for auditing tool or historic keeping, CI/CD orchestrating.

## Explanation

### Functional explanation

<!-- Explain the proposal as if it were already implemented and you're teaching it to another person. -->
<!-- Introduce new concepts, functional designs with real life examples, and low-fidelity mockups or  pseudocode to show how this proposal would look. -->

### --json option

Ability to use new `--json` option for all `dotnet list package` commands to ensure JSON-formatted output is emitted to the console.

```dotnetcli
dotnet list [<PROJECT>|<SOLUTION>] package [--config <SOURCE>]
    [--deprecated]
    [--framework <FRAMEWORK>] [--highest-minor] [--highest-patch]
    [--include-prerelease] [--include-transitive] [--interactive]
    [--outdated] [--source <SOURCE>] [-v|--verbosity <LEVEL>]
    [--vulnerable]
    [--json]

dotnet list package -h|--help
```

### dotnet list package

```dotnetcli

> Project 'MyProjectA' has the following package references

Reviewer 8: I'm thinking that, when I want to create archival records, will I want something more unique than the project name?
Adding the path, repo, commit ID, etc seems complex.
Simple idea: output the project GUID? That's something that doesn't change over the life of the project, right?

Author: I want to hear more voices, IMO GUID is not user friendly. Please note this one is already existing implementation.

Reviewer 8: Consider that, we can have both the name and a GUID.
Existing implementation wasn't intended to serve as an archival tool, so I think it's worth considering changes to how a project is identified with this spec.

Author: Without actual repo both name and GUID could be not really important, I feel how to keep repo and output tied together more of consuming application or user implementation concern.

Reviewer 4: If both are available is there a tangible cost to having both? Personally I don't see common scenarios where project won't work but having a really unique ID like a guid would help with edge cases like renames over time in long lived projects.

> "This used to be X.Domain and now we've created a new lib called x.Domain that contains only the interfaces and pure services and now old x.Domain is in x.Implementation" 

It's an odd one but I've seen weirder things in enterprise code and given the cost of having both (if they're both available) I don't think it'd be a bad call

Author: We can add `Guid`, but I don't want to add by default, adding fine-grained details like `Guid` distract from what is important, makes hard to make sense without using mental muscle.
Instead of just project name, probably we should use relative path something like `/Models/DTOs.csproj`

Author: @NuGet/nuget-client 
I added path here instead of GUID. Here I have 2 competing idea.
1. Add as `Path` property, downside is we have to repeat it for each TFM.
```json
{
  "version": 1,
  "projects": {
    "MyProjectA": [
      {
        "path": "src/lib/MyProjectA.csproj",
        "framework": "netcoreapp3.1",
        "topLevelPackages": [
          {..........
          }]
      } ,
      {
        "path": "src/tool/MyProjectA.csproj",
        "framework": "net5.0",
        "topLevelPackages": [ 
         ....
```
2.  Use actual path instead of project name, downside is it looks different from plain output. I added `name` it need to be repeated for each TFM.

```json
{
  "version": 1,
  "projects": {
    "src/lib/MyProjectA.csproj": [
      {
         name: "MyProjectA",
        ....
```

Reviewer 8: Seems that NPM uses Path. I think that satisfies the concern I had. It's at least better than an arbitrary proj name.

> downside is it looks different from plain output.

This spec is about being machine readable. Why worry about it not looking like the pretty-print version?

In example 2, could also add `"Name": "MyProjectA"` ? 

Really, this seems like a good point to validate with customers: 
1. does anyone other than me think naming collision is a concern?
2. do they prefer your 1 or 2, or something else?

Author: @JonDouglas  @aortiz-msft 
What is opinion here?

Reviewer 5: Do we use both the path and the name?

If we use path, a few qs Is it relative to invocation directory? Relatively to sln file when called on a solution?
Seems like something that should be called out.

Author: > Do we use both the path and the name?

Making extra manipulation get one or another is unnecessary work for end consumer, it could be tricky depending on OS.

> If we use path, a few qs Is it relative to invocation directory? Relatively to sln file when called on a solution? Seems like something that should be called out.

For now, I believe it's relative to invocation/working directory.

Author: > In example 2, could also add `"Name": "MyProjectA"` ?

Added.

Reviewer 6: While I think it's a good idea to include a path as it's helpful information. I would ask...

**Does the current human-readable output include a path? If it doesn't, then I don't see why the JSON output would include it until it does.** This seems out of scope to me from first glance. The goal of this work should be to JSON-ify the human-readable text today. Not add enhancements along the way.

The path is already inferred by the current working directory or explicit path the user provides to use the command in most of these cases.

Author: > While I think it's a good idea to include a path as it's helpful information. I would ask...
> 
> **Does the current human-readable output include a path? If it doesn't, then I don't see why the JSON output would include it until it does.** This seems out of scope to me from first glance. The goal of this work should be to JSON-ify the human-readable text today. Not add enhancements along the way.
> 
> The path is already inferred by the current working directory or explicit path the user provides to use the command in most of these cases.

Sure, I agree. I created tracking issue: https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/11562

Reviewer 5: > Making extra manipulation get one or another is unnecessary work for end consumer, it could be tricky depending on OS.

I disagree that there's any complexity here. This is something we already do. Relative paths, exact paths we have all of that.

But sounds like you went with another resolution anyways.

Author: Removed added `path` property it for now, since created tracking issue. Please check many follow up issues I created, maybe we need to cost and allocate our limit resource according to priority. During this PR review I repeatedly received "consider scoping the proposal rather than additional new features/functionality". 
Also, todays repro meeting suggested focus on minimal/small design and reiterate later.

Author: After team discussion we decided to add path again. Problem is we can manually (VS wouldn't let it happen) create have 2 `MyProjectA` in same solution then we're going to have key collision.

Reviewer 5: There was a recommendation during that meeting that suggested creating an "array" of projects, instead of a dictionary, so in that the duplicates would be handled.

Reviewer 5: Looking further down, looks like you changed to an array, so you can disregard this comment and maybe resolve the comment.

    "https://apidev.nugettest.org/v3-index/index.json"
  ],
  "MyProjectA": [
    {
      "framework": "netcoreapp3.1",
      "topLevelPackages": [
        {
          "id": "EntityFramework.MappingAPI",
          "requestedVersion": "*",
          "resolvedVersion": "6.2.1",
          "reasons": ["Legacy"],
          "alternativePackage": {
            "id": "Z.EntityFramework.Extensions",
            "versionRange": "[0.0.0,)"
          }
        },
        {
          "id": "NuGet.Core",
          "requestedVersion": "2.13.0",
          "resolvedVersion": "2.13.0",
          "reasons": ["Legacy"],
          "alternativePackage": null
        }
      ]
    }
  ],
  "MyProjectB": [
    {
      "framework": "netcoreapp3.1",
      "topLevelPackages": [
        {
          "id": "NuGet.Core",
          "requestedVersion": "2.13.0",
          "resolvedVersion": "2.13.0",
          "reasons": ["Legacy"],
          "alternativePackage": null
        }
      ]
    },
    {
      "framework": "net5.0",
      "topLevelPackages": [ 
        {
          "id": "NuGet.Core",
          "requestedVersion": "2.13.0",
          "resolvedVersion": "2.13.0",

>           "reasons": ["Legacy"],

Reviewer 5: I think we should make it this easy to mix with other commands, so maybe we'd call this deprecation reasons? 

what do others think?

Author: For me it's reasonable thing to do, changed to `deprecationReasons`

Reviewer 4: Would it maybe be better to group these into a deprecationInfo: {} object or similar? It seems odd to have a few keys that are necessarily related to each other but that aren't grouped into a more meaningful construct that associates them. 

ie:
```diff
{
          "id": "NuGet.Core",
          "requestedVersion": "2.13.0",
          "resolvedVersion": "2.13.0",
-         "reasons": ["Legacy"],
-         "alternativePackage": null
+         "deprecationInfo": {
+           "reasons": ["Legacy"],
+           "alternativePackage": null
+        }
}
```

                                                 Moderate   https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-5whq-j5qg-wjvp

   [net5.0]:
   Top-level Package      Requested   Resolved   Severity   Advisory URL
   > DotNetNuke.Core      6.0.0       6.0.0      High       https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-g8j6-m4p7-5rfq
                                                 Moderate   https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-v76m-f5cx-8rg4
                                                 Critical   https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-x8f7-h444-97w4
                                                 Moderate   https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-5c66-x4wm-rjfx
                                                 High       https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-x2rg-fmcv-crq5
                                                 High       https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-j3g9-6fx5-gjv7
                                                 High       https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-xx3h-j3cx-8qfj
                                                 Moderate   https://github.com/advisories/GHSA-5whq-j5qg-wjvp
```

### dotnet list package --vulnerable --json

> ```json

Reviewer 8: How can we record in the output that `--include-transitive` wasn't used here?
In other words, if I look at this output years from now, how would I know whether any transitives were in this project?

Not sure how best to indicate that in the JSON itself. 
Perhaps the missing "transitivePackages" section as it is explains this? Is that intuitive, consistent with other JSON-output CLIs?
Certainly, output for 0 transitives with `--include-transitives` should not look identical when omitting `--include-transitives`.

Reviewer 4: I don't think it's **ideal** but --include-transitive I would naively expect to have an empty array when there are 0 transitive dependencies vs not having a key at all. Though I would probably argue that --include-transitive is a weird flag to have. I think it makes more sense to include them by default (since it's already separated into a different group). I think if I'm looking for vulns it would be a real footgun to have to say "but really all the vulns please" at the end of my command

Reviewer 9: > I don't think it's **ideal** but --include-transitive I would naively expect to have an empty array when there are 0 transitive dependencies vs not having a key at all. Though I would probably argue that --include-transitive is a weird flag to have. I think it makes more sense to include them by default (since it's already separated into a different group). I think if I'm looking for vulns it would be a real footgun to have to say "but really all the vulns please" at the end of my command

I agree. I would expect transitive dependencies to be included by default.

Author: Yes, I start to tilt toward including transitive dependencies by default because output should be full snapshot of SBOM, without transitive dependencies it's not full, because dependencies could have vulns.

Author: After offline discussion I strongly agree with `The behavior of the command is separate from the json output.` 
This is out of scope from MVP.
I created separate tracking issue: https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/11550

Author: See other discussion https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/11446#discussion_r766734450.

  * Direct/top level packages point to dependency packages. >> Could be included, down side is duplicate information, increase json size. Also I feel https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/11553 addresses this issue better, because in the end who transitive dependency brought in is more important than what dependencies exist under each top package.
  * Content hash. >> It's very easy to include it, question is how about source? Related issue https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/11552

* [npm ls --json](https://gist.github.com/erdembayar/ddfbf9c160fbb8a0e31e3596f03ee906), [npm outdated -json](https://gist.github.com/erdembayar/12030f1db89ad9f2e206f2b6ff7d740f) Actually it's less sophisticated than what we have, because it doesn't have multi TFM and projects concept.

## Unresolved Questions

* Donnie: When I want to create archival records, will I want something more unique than the project name?
Adding the path, repo, commit ID, etc seems complex. [r766920783](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/11446#discussion_r766920783)
  >> `path property` could be solution here, see proposal.

> * Donnie: How can we record in the output that --include-transitive wasn't used here?

Reviewer 5: I think this can be removed. 
The current proposal includes the parameters.

Author: Sure.

In other words, if I look at this output years from now, how would I know whether any transitives were in this project? [r766924390](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/11446#discussion_r766924390)
  >> We could include options and parameters used here.

> * Loïc : How would this format evolve if we add another "package pivot" in addition to top level and transitive packages? For example, what if we add new package kinds for source generators, Roslyn analyzers, etc...? [r767026799](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/11446#discussion_r767026799)

Reviewer 5: Source Gens and analyzers are packages today as is. 
Safe to say that we can think about when the scenario arises.

> # Machine readable JSON output for dotnet list package

Reviewer 3: the filename should include something about dotnet list package, because someone browsing the folder will not have any context about what `MachineReadableOutput` is about, and will be reasonable to assume to applies to all of NuGet.

Author: Sure, thank you for your review.
I'll rename to `DotnetListPackageMachineReadableJsonOutput.md` before I merge once it's approved. Now changing the file name makes hard to keep track of PR comments.

Reviewer 5: Probably a good time to rename this doc now :)

Author: Sure, should I copy to `proposed/2022` folder?

* Status: **In Review**
* Author: [Erick Yondon](https://github.com/erdembayar)
* GitHub Issue [7752](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/7752)

> ## Problem background

Reviewer 6: Great background! It really helps us understand the current limitations of the command today.

<!-- Why are we doing this? What pain points does this solve? What is the expected outcome? -->

> Many organization are required by [regulation](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2021/05/12/executive-order-on-improving-the-nations-cybersecurity/) to audit packages that they're using in repository.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
Many organizations are required by [regulation](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2021/05/12/executive-order-on-improving-the-nations-cybersecurity/) to audit packages that they're using in a repository.

Currently there's no easy way to produce a [Software Bill of Material (SBOM)](https://blog.sonatype.com/what-is-a-software-bill-of-materials) output which can be consumed by another auditing system or kept for records.
```

I suggest adding a link to learn about SBOMs and changing "historic keeping" to "kept for records" / "record keeping"

Author: Thank you for your review. Great input, addressed.

Currently there's no easy way produce Software Bill of Material (SBOM) output which can be consumed by another auditing system or historic keeping.

> * Parse-friendly output. Other PMP like Npm already have it(`npm ls --parseable` and `npm ls --json`).

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
* Parse-friendly output. Other package managers like [NPM already have it](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v7/commands/npm-ls) (`npm ls --parseable` and `npm ls --json`).
```

I like to reduce the number of acronyms used where possible (PMP --> package manager)

* Useful for CI/CD auditing(compliance, security ..)
  * Produce Software Bill of Material (SBOM) (compliance, historic keeping)
  * Enhancing Software Supply Chain Security
    * check any vulnerable packages
    * check any deprecated packages
    * Check any outdated packages
  * Check license compliance

>   * Resolve dependency issue (detect duplicate packages, detect new dependency introduced or existing one removed etc ..)

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
  * Resolve dependency issues (detect duplicate packages, newly introduced dependencies, dependency removals, etc.)
```

Minor grammatical fixes

Author: Thank you for your review. Great input, addressed.

  * Making the output machine-readable unlocks additional tooling and automation scenarios in CI/CD pipeline above scenarios.

## Who are the customers

Anyone (government/private enterprises, security experts, individual contributors) who wants to consume `dotnet list package` output for auditing tool or historic keeping, CI/CD orchestrating.

## Explanation

### Functional explanation

<!-- Explain the proposal as if it were already implemented and you're teaching it to another person. -->
<!-- Introduce new concepts, functional designs with real life examples, and low-fidelity mockups or  pseudocode to show how this proposal would look. -->

### --json option

> Ability to use new `--json` option for all `dotnet list package` commands to ensure JSON-formatted output is emitted to the console.

Reviewer 3: Maybe I've just used `vswhere` too much, but I prefer `--format json`, where `--format text` is the default (current) output. That way text can be output explicitly, if desired for some reason.

Reviewer 10: does that also imply that other formats than json and text can be used?

Reviewer 11: I agree, a `--format` lets us have a single command-line argument to specify the output format rather than having a `--json` and `--xml` and a `--yaml`.

Reviewer 3: > does that also imply that other formats than json and text can be used?

Only if `dotnet list package -h` says there are options other than text and json, which is not being proposed in this spec. But it's clear and obvious how extra formats could be added in the future, and would allow the command line parsing library to handle the error handling when customers provide more than one, rather than having to implement that error handling ourselves. Not that implementation details are a good excuse to do something for a customer UX point of view, but when there are two equally good options from a customer UX point of view, then I feel like technical implementation details can be used in the decision making process.

Reviewer 5: I just wanted to +1 that. 

We should do `--format <arg>`

Reviewer 7: EDIT: remembered that we already have `-o/--output` in several CLI commands for the 'output directory' and so that's a non-starter for that option.

Chiming in with my +1 on the `--format <blah>` ~or `--output <blah>` model~, as that model is open to extension, already modeled quite well in prominent examples like the `az` CLI for Azure and the `aws` CLI for AWS (though they use `--output`, which is untenable for us).  This proposal is the first such output proposal for the core .NET CLI tools, and so whatever we land on here is going to be what all other tools have to use, as we spread JSON/etc output to the rest of the CLI.

Author: @baronfel 
I favor `--format <blah>`. Because I can see `--output` is already used for another popular dotnet command.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8766776/145644723-a6e9227c-378a-4238-8c86-b0bec020e26a.png)

Reviewer 7: @erdembayar good catch, I edited my comment before refreshing the page and seeing your response

```dotnetcli

> dotnet list [<PROJECT>|<SOLUTION>] package [--config <SOURCE>]

Reviewer 11: `dotnet list` shows _project_ references and package references.  Are we going to make both types display as JSON?  If not, we'll have to figure out way to make the `--format json` only show when a users sees the usage for `dotnet list <PROJECT> package`

Author: It only applies to `package` only. Considering below works I believe it's possible.

```
dotnet list .\MyProjectA\MyProjectA.csproj package
Project 'MyProjectA' has the following package references
   [netcoreapp3.1]:
   Top-level Package                      Requested             Resolved
   > Microsoft.Extensions.Primitives      [1.0.0, 5.0.0]        1.0.0
   > NuGet.Commands                       4.8.0-preview3.5278   4.8.0-preview3.5278
   > Text2Xml.Lib                         [1.1.2, 2.0.0)        1.1.2

```

Author: `dotnet list <PROJECT> package` doesn't display any project reference, only package references. See above example.

  ]
}
```

### dotnet list package --outdated

```dotnetcli

The following sources were used:
   https://api.nuget.org/v3/index.json
   https://apidev.nugettest.org/v3-index/index.json

Project `MyProjectA` has the following updates to its packages
   [netcoreapp3.1]:
   Top-level Package                      Requested             Resolved              Latest
   > Microsoft.Extensions.Primitives      [1.0.0, 5.0.0]        1.0.0                 6.0.0
   > NuGet.Commands                       4.8.0-preview3.5278   4.8.0-preview3.5278   6.0.0
   > Text2Xml.Lib                         [1.1.2, 2.0.0)        1.1.2                 1.1.4

Project `MyProjectB` has the following updates to its packages
   [netcoreapp3.1]:
   Top-level Package      Requested             Resolved              Latest
   > NuGet.Commands       4.8.0-preview3.5278   4.8.0-preview3.5278   6.0.0
   > Text2Xml.Lib         1.1.2                 1.1.2                 1.1.4

   [net5.0]:
   Top-level Package      Requested             Resolved              Latest
   > NuGet.Commands       4.8.0-preview3.5278   4.8.0-preview3.5278   6.0.0
   > Text2Xml.Lib         1.1.2                 1.1.2                 1.1.4
```

> ### dotnet list package --outdated --json

Reviewer 3: Is there a customer benefit to having json output outdated and vulnerable separately?  I think there is for text output, but not for json.

Do we believe that customers will want to check both, or only one of the two?  If customers want both, with the current proposal they'll have to call `dotnet list package` twice and possibly merge the results if they want to handle packages that are both deprecated and contain known vulnerabilities. If they only want one, but we implement json output containing both vulnerability and deprecation info, it costs almost nothing for the customer to ignore the part of the json they're not interested in.

We shouldn't let existing implementation details decide, or even contribute significantly to customer UX design, but both vulnerable and deprecation information comes from the same nuget http protocol resource, so there's basically zero cost to outputting both.

I think there is a benefit to json output having an "online" and "offline" mode, so `dotnet list package --format json` can be fast, without making network calls. But I don't see what customer benefit there is to forcing customers who want both vulnerability and deprecation information in json format to need to call the command twice and possible implement their own logic in merging the results.

Reviewer 11: I agree, I would expect `--outdated` to just show more metadata like
```json
"outdated": true
```

Having to run the command twice seems bad, the point is to give something readable and the user can process the output in whatever manner they want.

Reviewer 11: And the same with `--deprecated`

Reviewer 10: Do you have a proposal of what the ideal experience should look like? I agree that most customers who use the json output will probably want both, but we also want the output to meet their expectations based on existing behavior.

Would be weird to have `dotnet list package --outdated --json` also output vulnerable packages if they only expect outdated packages.

Similarly, most customers will probably also want transitive dependencies to create an SBOM. 

Personally, I think the dotnet cli needs an all up `dotnet list package --all` that shows all deprecated, vulnerable, and outdated top level and transitive packages.

Altneraitvely the behavior of `--outdated` and `--deprecated` could be additive rather than exclusive. That adds to the scope of this work though.

Reviewer 5: ```json
 {
          "id": "Microsoft.Extensions.Primitives",
          "requestedVersion": "[1.0.0, 5.0.0]",
          "resolvedVersion": "1.0.0",
          "latestVersion": "6.0.0",
          "deprecated": "true",
          "vulnerable": "details?",
        },
```

Should the existence of `latestVersion` imply outdated? 

There is obv a world where the installed version is *not* the latest available though, so maybe that warrants the existence of both.

Reviewer 5: fwiw, I actually think that we should design one format for *all* combinations, however you *should* be able to scope the output if you wanted to.

Reviewer 6: Please refer to this comment: https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/7752#issuecomment-740206375

> Human-readable output is first and foremost. This should be covered with the current list package command, however we may have some improvements coming to the command to make this better to glance at.

> Machine-readable output is second to make output easier to handle, especially complex lists this command can produce (especially with transitive dependencies included)

The default format should be human-readable. The specified format should be machine-readable. 

We should reach out to Chet Husk to help us understand what would scale with other `dotnet CLI` commands before leaning on one side.

@chgill-MSFT That is something I originally proposed but sadly we never got to it. We will have a similar experience in https://github.com/NuGet/Home/blob/dotnet-audit/proposed/2021/DotNetAudit.md

Author: Won't fix, out of scope from MVP. **_The behavior of the command is separate from the json output._** I created tracking issue. https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/11551
Also overlap with `dotnet audit` spec.

   > NuGet.Core                      2.13.0      2.13.0     Legacy

Project `MyProjectB` has the following deprecated packages
   [netcoreapp3.1]:
   Top-level Package      Requested   Resolved   Reason(s)   Alternative
   > NuGet.Core           2.13.0      2.13.0     Legacy

   [net5.0]:
   Top-level Package      Requested   Resolved   Reason(s)   Alternative
   > NuGet.Core           2.13.0      2.13.0     Legacy
```

### dotnet list package --deprecated --json

```json
{
  "version": 1,
   "sources": [
    "https://api.nuget.org/v3/index.json",
    "https://apidev.nugettest.org/v3-index/index.json"
  ],
  "MyProjectA": [
    {
      "framework": "netcoreapp3.1",
      "topLevelPackages": [
        {
          "id": "EntityFramework.MappingAPI",
          "requestedVersion": "*",
          "resolvedVersion": "6.2.1",
          "reasons": ["Legacy"],
          "alternativePackage": {
            "id": "Z.EntityFramework.Extensions",
            "versionRange": "[0.0.0,)"
          }
        },
        {
          "id": "NuGet.Core",
          "requestedVersion": "2.13.0",
          "resolvedVersion": "2.13.0",
          "reasons": ["Legacy"],

>           "alternativePackage": null

Reviewer 6: Anything that is `null` should just not show up in JSON in my opinion.

Author: Thank you for you input. Sure, removed.

   > NuGet.Commands       4.8.0-preview3.5278   4.8.0-preview3.5278
   > Text2Xml.Lib         1.1.2                 1.1.2

   Transitive Package                                                                   Resolved
   > Microsoft.CSharp                                                                   4.0.1
   > Microsoft.NETCore.Platforms                                                        1.1.0
   > Microsoft.NETCore.Targets                                                          1.1.0
   > Microsoft.Win32.Primitives                                                         4.3.0
...

   [net5.0]:
   Top-level Package      Requested             Resolved
   > NuGet.Commands       4.8.0-preview3.5278   4.8.0-preview3.5278
   > Text2Xml.Lib         1.1.2                 1.1.2

   Transitive Package                                                                   Resolved
   > Microsoft.CSharp                                                                   4.0.1
   > Microsoft.NETCore.Platforms                                                        1.1.0
   > Microsoft.NETCore.Targets                                                          1.1.0
...

```

> ### dotnet list package --include-transitive --json

Reviewer 3: Is there a compelling customer reason why we wouldn't always include transitive packages in json output?  Since "top level packages" and transitive packages are being proposed in different parts of the json, customers who only care about "top level packages" can just ignore the other part of the json.

fewer options == simpler for customers.

Reviewer 11: I would say its a bad user experience to have different defaults depending on if you specify `--format json` or not.  I do agree fewer options is simpler, but there's no `--do-not-include-transitive` option to opt out of it right?

Reviewer 5: I think we should support *all* the same combinations we support today and the json sohuld output whatever the `--format` less command would. 

The only thing that I would recommend is that the json output schema is one and the same regardless of the option.

Reviewer 6: The output command should simply display output for the context of the command. i.e. `--include-transitive --format json` would show them.

Author: @NuGet/nuget-client 
Currently this question main stumbling block. Whether we do `--include-transitive` implicitly for json output or not?
Please give your opinion. 
I don't have any strong opinion, I feel adding `--include-transitive` manually not really issue customer, I want to merge this PR soon.

Reviewer 6: I do not believe you should include this implicitly. It defeats the purpose of the parameter itself even if the previous design was not ideal for user experience. Another issue to track including this by default in the various list commands & respective arguments might be better to track.

Author: From offline discussion I strongly agree with `The behavior of the command is separate from the json output.` 
We should address it in separately, I don't find example of other application/tool with different defaults depending on output type, it set wrong example, hard to justify later.
I created separate tracking issue: https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/11550

Reviewer 8: > I do not believe you should include this implicitly.

> The behavior of the command is separate from the json output.

I agree with these statements mainly because of this: `"parameters": "--include-transitive",`.
If there was no way to know by looking at this JSON file whether transitives were being included in the query, I'd ask for it to be made clear.

Author: > > I do not believe you should include this implicitly.
> 
> > The behavior of the command is separate from the json output.
> 
> I agree with these statements mainly because of this: `"parameters": "--include-transitive",`. If there was no way to know by looking at this JSON file whether transitives were being included in the query, I'd ask for it to be made clear.

We already have tracking issue for make `--include-transitive` by default, also I don't want to add `--include-transitive not included` for this, it's responsibility of user check how tool works, read documentation before use.

      "topLevelPackages": [
        {
          "id": "NuGet.Commands",
          "requestedVersion": "4.8.0-preview3.5278",
          "resolvedVersion": "4.8.0-preview3.5278"
        },
        {
          "id": "Text2Xml.Lib",
          "requestedVersion": "1.1.2",
          "resolvedVersion": "1.1.2"
        }
      ],
      "transitivePackages": [
        {
          "id": "Microsoft.CSharp",
          "resolvedVersion": "4.0.1"
        },
        {
          "id": "Microsoft.NETCore.Platforms",
          "resolvedVersion": "1.1.0"
        },
...
      ]
    },
    {
      "framework": "net5.0",
      "topLevelPackages": [ 
        {
          "id": "NuGet.Commands",
          "requestedVersion": "4.8.0-preview3.5278",
          "resolvedVersion": "4.8.0-preview3.5278"
        },
        {
          "id": "Text2Xml.Lib",
          "requestedVersion": "1.1.2",
          "resolvedVersion": "1.1.2"
        }
      ],
      "transitivePackages": [
        {
          "id": "Microsoft.CSharp",
          "resolvedVersion": "4.0.1"
        },
        {
          "id": "Microsoft.NETCore.Platforms",
          "resolvedVersion": "1.1.0"
        },
...
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

> ### --flatten option

Reviewer 3: You didn't explicitly mention this scenario in the spec:

What happens when the command is used on a solution, and a package is used as a top level package in one project, but is a transitive package in a different project? Will it appear in both parts of the json, or only one?

Author: It looks this is out of context. Removed.

> Ability to use new `--flatten` option conjunction with `--json` option for all `dotnet list package` commands to ensure JSON-formatted output is emitted to the console for multiproject solution(including multitarget projects)and all projects and target frameworks are flattened. Same package with multiple version entry is possible. It's useful more for SBOM than single `--json` option.

Reviewer 6: This feels like a YAGNI thing. If we can define when this will be used, we can consider it, but I'd say we should just keep the spec as simple as possible with just `--json` for now.

Author: Sure, removed.

```dotnetcli
dotnet list [<PROJECT>|<SOLUTION>] package [--config <SOURCE>]
    [--deprecated]
    [--framework <FRAMEWORK>] [--highest-minor] [--highest-patch]
    [--include-prerelease] [--include-transitive] [--interactive]
    [--outdated] [--source <SOURCE>] [-v|--verbosity <LEVEL>]
    [--vulnerable]
    [--json]
    [--flatten]

dotnet list package -h|--help
```

> ### dotnet list package

Reviewer 3: Consider using heading levels to signal document structure. You already have a 3rd level heading `dotnet list package` example earlier in the document (line 50) under the same 2nd level heading. Therefore, from a document structure point of view, this is either redundant or using a bad header title.  I get that it's being done to have the json and text versions close to each other for easier comparison, but since almost the entire document is level 3 headings under the same level 2 heading, it's a bit harder to skim over the document and understand what the different "sections" of the design are.

Also, consider that GitHub makes all headers HTML anchors, so they can be deep linked. All the headers with the same title will have the same anchor, and therefore it will be impossible to deep link any except the first. It's a very minor issue, but I think it shows attention to detail if it's avoided.

   > Microsoft.NETCore.Platforms                                                        1.1.0
   > Microsoft.NETCore.Targets                                                          1.1.0
...

```

### dotnet list package --include-transitive --json --flatten

```json
{
  "version": 1,
  "topLevelPackages": [
       {
            "id": "Microsoft.Extensions.Primitives",
            "requestedVersion": "[1.0.0, 5.0.0]",
            "resolvedVersion": "1.0.0"
        },
        {
            "id": "NuGet.Commands",
            "requestedVersion": "4.8.0-preview3.5278",
            "resolvedVersion": "4.8.0-preview3.5278"
        },
        {
            "id": "Text2Xml.Lib",
            "requestedVersion": "[1.1.2, 2.0.0)",
            "resolvedVersion": "1.1.2"
        }
    ],
    "transitivePackages": [
        {
            "id": "Microsoft.CSharp",
            "resolvedVersion": "4.0.1"
        },
        {
            "id": "Microsoft.NETCore.Platforms",
            "resolvedVersion": "1.1.0"
        },
        {
            "id": "Microsoft.NETCore.Targets",
            "resolvedVersion": "1.1.0"
        }
...
    ]
}
```

> ### Compatibility

Reviewer 6: I don't feel like we need this. The CLI --json output is much different than a versioned web API for example. It should be expected that with new versions of NuGet, there is the possibility of a breaking change in a major version release. We should try to be additive where possible, but it's very possible some of these things will change with the evolution of tooling.

Reviewer 3: I disagree. Interactive tools can change output because they're designed for humans to read, and when it unexpectedly changes output, humans can adapt. Adding a json output makes it an API, even if it's being output from a CLI tool rather than a web API.

Also consider the fact that it's most likely going to be used in CI scripts, and the version of the .NET SDK installed on the CI agent might not be in control of the team whose product is being built, it might be controlled by an infrastructure team, or another company altogether (GitHub and Azure DevOps hosted agents for non-Microsoft employees).

Reviewer 6: I still don't see how this is beneficial. The SDK version should be used to infer compatibility, not some command specific output "version". I haven't seen this in other CLI experiences output either. Why should we do this?

>  We start with `version 1`, as long as we don't remove or rename then it'll be backward compatible. In case [we change version](https://stackoverflow.com/a/13945074) just add new properties, keep old ones even it's not used.

Reviewer 3: > We start with `version 1`, as long as we don't remove or rename then it'll be backward compatible.

In that case, should we provide a `--json-version 1` or `--output-version 1` option, so if we create a version 2 output, then customers who are writing scripts to parse the json from version 1 don't suddenly start breaking?  Remember that customers using cloud hosted CI agents may not choose when the version of the dotnet sdk is upgraded. Ok, there is the `dotnet-install.[ps1|sh]` script, allowing customers to install specific versions they want, and Azure DevOps does have a `UseDotNet` task to select a specific version. Is our guidance that customers who want deterministic output, that they must also control which specific version of the dotnet sdk is being used, or should we give customers the ability to control which version NuGet outputs?

> keep old ones even it's not used

That doesn't feel like a very honest definition of backwards compatibility. If customers write scripts to parse the json and use the property, then a new version of the dotnet cli that starts output empty values is going to break the customer script's business logic. Sure, from a schema point of view it's still there, but from a pragmatic point of view it's breaking.

Reviewer 11: Versioning the output seems odd to me, `vswhere` and `npm ls` don't have this.  Do we need to?  Let's just never break the schema...

Reviewer 3: In which case doing good design up-front is more important, and we should leave the design spec up for a longer period of time and encourage customers to provide feedback, not treat this is a "quick" customer sprint issue where we rush the design and implementation.

There are trade-offs either way, we have to choose which one is more important to us.

Reviewer 3: especially when half the team is on vacation at the moment

Author: > In that case, should we provide a --json-version 1 or --output-version 1 option, so if we create a version 2 output, then customers who are writing scripts to parse the json from version 1 don't suddenly start breaking?

I'm favor of just having `version`. But not sure about `--output-version 1` part, as long as we're additive we're good. Of course, I welcome more feedbacks. Implementing this is not really hard, but I feel we should focus on MVP. Could we add `--output-version 1` option if ever need `version 2` in the future?

Author: Another feedback related to this. https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/11446#discussion_r766776940

Reviewer 3: > as long as we're additive we're good

In which case version is completely unnecessary.  But if we're saying "we're not 100% sure things won't change in 10 years from now, so let's add a version property to the output just to be safe", then by using the same logic we should allow the customer to choose what version of the output they want, assuming the version of the tool supports the output version requested.

> I feel we should focus on MVP.

Consider the customer impact. We don't add a `--output-version` now because we think that this is what agile software development and MVP's mean 🙄 . Customers write scripts to use this in their CI.  In a year or longer we decide we want to make a breaking change, but also implement `--output-version` so customers who have existing scripts aren't forced to change yet. However, since all these customers wrote scripts before `--output-version` was implemented, none of their scripts use it.  And since the vast majority of people parse json in a non-strict mode, when the default output changes, their scripts are not going to fail, notifying them that something change changed. No, their scripts will fail to detect that the projects are using packages with known vulnerabilities.

Not doing things in order to start with an MVP and add features later works only when it's something that won't cause problems when added later, unless it's something that's intentionally a breaking change. But the entire point of the `version` property in the json and/or an `--output-version` argument is to provide a safe way to make breaking changes.

Reviewer 4: I think that including the version + a **major** version selector option would be a good idea. Keeping around some of the legacy stuff for serialization might add up to a bit more work but I would argue that it also provides you ways of making breaking changes without falling into the trap of having to do:

```jsonc
//OG
"PropertyYouMightCareAbout" : "someValue",
//Now we have to have a different key or massage the data unreasonably
"PropertyYouMightCareAboutButWithMoreInfo": {
  "PropertyYouMightCareAboutOG": someValueFromTheOldKey,
   "AdditionalMetadataYouAddedLater": [ "newMetadata" ]
}
```

On top of this I think that having at least a Major + a minor for this (for ease of change discovery/documentation discovery for consumers) is also a good idea. The --output-version flag should only ever accept majors but knowing what minor you're on from a tooling perspective would be useful at a minor cost.

Author: During my discussion with Jeff I noticed 1 point: Versioning’s mostly suitable for file format which read/write by app, but for files which can be edited by human manually having explicit versioning doesn’t make much sense. So, I'm going to include versioning here. By default, we output current/latest schema version (which is 1 for us) output, same as most other application does. But `--json-version 1` support is up to discussion if we really come up with `version 2` schema in the future, by then we can make much educated decision.

Reviewer 6: Please consider doing a cross-comparison of other CLI experiences and whether they include schema versions in machine readable output.

Author: Unfortunately, there are not much other .net CLI experience to compare. Only 1 which output is `dotnet counter` but output is very simply `key value pair`. 
By the way we already have explicit versioning in `.nupkg.metadata` (version2), `packages.lock.jsons` file (version 1), I don't see any reason we do something different in this case

Reviewer 6: I meant in other ecosystems that list out dependency graphs. There have been some hinted already such as `npm ls`, `go list`, `cargo tree`, and more.

Author: > I meant in other ecosystems that list out dependency graphs. There have been some hinted already such as `npm ls`, `go list`, `cargo tree`, and more.

I already added my observation of `npm ls json` into prior art section, it's quite simpler than ours and doesn't have versioning.  
For below tools I never used before I'm just sharing what I have found from search engine.
[go list](https://dave.cheney.net/2014/09/14/go-list-your-swiss-army-knife) looks like parseable output than json output.
[cargo tree](https://lib.rs/crates/cargo-tree) is more of graphic tool than readable output.
[mvn dependency:list](https://coderwall.com/p/87mdxg/print-a-flat-list-of-dependencies-of-a-maven-project) it produces parseable output.
[mvn dependency:tree](https://devwithus.com/maven-dependency-tree/) produces tree like output.

Author: In addition to our `.nupkg.metadata`, `packages.lock.json`, we have versioning [dependencyGraph ](https://gist.github.com/erdembayar/351e247185519d169c6afc4077007274), asset files too.

Author: After team discussion we include `versioning` in schema and output versioning like below. Intention behind output versioning even though it's not common in other .net CLI experience is our CI build script is failing so many times changes made by others unannounced and it's quite disruptive to us. We feel it's good practice to have people to have stable and predictable CI operations/output is important since this is machine readable output, maybe it could become example for others to follow. This way once setup pipeline work predictably for quite long time, otherwise customer always have to keep eye on changes.

```
dotnet list package --format json --output-version 1
dotnet list package --format yaml --output-version 1
```

### Out-of-scope

> * To avoid disk I/O, we won't support saving the machine-readable output to disk as part of this spec. The work-around is for the consumer to read from the console's stdout stream.

Reviewer 3: I have no problem with not having a "write to file" option, but I don't feel like avoiding disk IO is a good justification, especially when redirecting stdout to a file is going to cause the exact same disk IO.

Reviewer 5: I'd just say we're not gonna add file output for now.

Author: Removed `https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/11446/files` part.

* At this point, no other CLI commands (e.g. dotnet list reference) will be within scope for this feature.

> "--parsable" option needs separate spec.

Reviewer 3: what is `--parsable`? it's not listed anywhere else in this spec

Author: It looks it's more it's concise, [cli manipulation friendly version](https://stackoverflow.com/a/31586321), specially for  pipelined command like `grep`. 

```
npm ls --parseable
C:\NuGetProj\IssueRepro\JsonOutput
C:\NuGetProj\IssueRepro\JsonOutput\node_modules\http-proxy
C:\NuGetProj\IssueRepro\JsonOutput\node_modules\eventemitter3
C:\NuGetProj\IssueRepro\JsonOutput\node_modules\requires-port
C:\NuGetProj\IssueRepro\JsonOutput\node_modules\lodash
C:\NuGetProj\IssueRepro\JsonOutput\node_modules\websocket-extensions

```
 ```
npm ls --json
{
  "dependencies": {
    "http-proxy": {
      "version": "1.16.2",
      "from": "http-proxy@1.16.2",
      "resolved": "https://registry.npmjs.org/http-proxy/-/http-proxy-1.16.2.tgz",
      "dependencies": {
        "eventemitter3": {
          "version": "1.2.0",
          "from": "eventemitter3@1.x.x",
          "resolved": "https://registry.npmjs.org/eventemitter3/-/eventemitter3-1.2.0.tgz"
        },
        "requires-port": {
          "version": "1.0.0",
          "from": "requires-port@1.x.x",
          "resolved": "https://registry.npmjs.org/requires-port/-/requires-port-1.0.0.tgz"
        }
      }
    },
    "lodash": {
      "version": "4.2.0",
      "from": "lodash@4.2.0",
      "resolved": "https://registry.npmjs.org/lodash/-/lodash-4.2.0.tgz"
    },
    "websocket-extensions": {
      "version": "0.1.1",
      "from": "websocket-extensions@0.1.1",
      "resolved": "https://registry.npmjs.org/websocket-extensions/-/websocket-extensions-0.1.1.tgz"
    }
  }
}
```

Author: I selected `json` implementation over `parseable` due to many favorable comments ( https://github.com/nuget/home/issues/7752#issuecomment-459836491,
https://github.com/nuget/home/issues/7752#issuecomment-459907122,
https://github.com/nuget/home/issues/7752#issuecomment-474191608,
https://github.com/nuget/home/issues/7752#issuecomment-5129720081). 
Of course `parseable` is still option next time, but I felt it's too much for this spec.

Author: By the way another candidate in the future is `yaml`

Reviewer 12: YAML is OK for files edited by people, but I wouldn't want it for data that is generated by one program and intended to be parsed by another, because it needs a more complex parser than JSON.

* Currently license info is not emitted from any cli command, it could be quite useful, we should consider in the future.

> ## Prior Art

Reviewer 3: FWIW, vswhere has a `-format <type>` option, where `<type>` can be text, json, xml, or csv.  I'm not proposing we support anything other than json and text, I'm just saying there's prior art in being able to explicitly set the default output (`-format text`), in addition to changing the output format.

Also, both MSBuild and .NET's test runner (technically vstest, but the customer entry point is `dotnet test`, despite `dotnet vstest` also existing) support the concept of loggers, which allow multiple to be used at the same time, or if only one is being used, it allows the customer to choose what format is being used. It also allows customers to write their own loggers, so they can output to whatever format they want. But their design and use-case is quite different. I don't know if we want to consider it prior-art, but then provide justification as to why we're not doing it in the same way since those are both already built into the dotnet cli and we're "inventing" a different way that does not yet exist in the dotnet cli.

Author: Passing user logger like msbuild is interesting idea. But wondering could we do next iteration in the future or have to think about it in current implementation? Unless we're exposing ton of public new api then we can do later.

<!-- What prior art, both good and bad are related to this proposal? -->
<!-- Do other features exist in other ecosystems and what experience have their community had? -->
<!-- What lessons from other communities can we learn from? -->
<!-- Are there any resources that are relevent to this proposal? -->

* https://github.com/NuGet/Home/blob/dotnet-audit/proposed/2021/DotNetAudit.md#dotnet-audit---json

* https://github.com/NuGet/Home/wiki/%5BSpec%5D-Machine-readable-output-for-dotnet-list-package

> ## Feedback

Reviewer 6: Would recommend a "Unresolved Questions" or leave this section as a place for you to write down major reoccurring questions & write answers to those questions in the spec when you have them.

> File NuGet.Client bugs in the [NuGet/Home](https://github.com/nuget/home/issues)

Reviewer 3: I don't understand the benefit of this feedback section. When the design is under review, shouldn't feedback be in this pull request?

After it's merged, why file a bug? Depending on the feedback, it might be a feature or DCR. In fact, arguably any feedback will be a feature or DCR since whatever issue the customer has with the command once implemented will be working as designed, so design feedback after merge by definition can't be a bug?

Are we also trying to signal that pull requests that modify this document will be rejected without consideration?

Considering that Home/issues is the place for all product feedback, I personally don't see the benefit of calling it out in this design spec unless we're signaling that we want a non-normal process for feedback.

* Useful for CI/CD auditing(compliance, security ..)
  * Produce Software Bill of Material (SBOM) (compliance, historic keeping)
  * Enhancing Software Supply Chain Security
    * Check any vulnerable packages
    * Check any deprecated packages
    * Check any outdated packages
  * Check license compliance
  * Resolve dependency issues (detect duplicate packages, newly introduced dependencies, dependency removals, etc.)
  * Making the output machine-readable unlocks additional tooling and automation scenarios in CI/CD pipeline above scenarios.

## Who are the customers

Anyone (government/private enterprises, security experts, individual contributors) who wants to consume `dotnet list package` output for auditing tool or historic keeping, CI/CD orchestrating.

## Explanation

### Functional explanation

<!-- Explain the proposal as if it were already implemented and you're teaching it to another person. -->
<!-- Introduce new concepts, functional designs with real life examples, and low-fidelity mockups or  pseudocode to show how this proposal would look. -->

> #### `--format` option

Reviewer 7: `--format` is already used in `dotnet nuget list source`, though with a different set of valid arguments:
* Detailed
* Short

I think it might be confusing to the user to have both of these distinct sets of meaning, especially as I expect `--format` to become a thing across more SDK commands, so in the future we should look towards having an different way to get the detailed/short forms of `dotnet nuget list source` if those different forms are useful.

Author: Thank you for your feedback. I didn't even know there was formatting option for `dotnet nuget list source`. Difference between `Detailed` and `Short` output is trivial, maybe we can change it the future, I'll create tracking issue.

Author: https://github.com/nuget/home/issues/11615

> #### `--format` option

Reviewer 7: It would be ideal to have a 'short form' for `--format`, but `-f` is off the table because it belongs to `force` by broad convention and `--framework` in the .NET space specifically. I'll think on this more and short forms can be added easily later.

Author: Sure, once we get MVP then we can polish it based on community input.

> Ability to use new `--format` option for all `dotnet list package` commands to ensure formatted(json, text, csv etc) output is emitted to the console.

Reviewer 5: You should call out the valid options here.

Reviewer 7: We should only support `json` and `text` for the initial set, IMO.

Author: Removed others, kept (text, json) only.

            ],
            "transitivePackages": [
              {
                "id": "Microsoft.CSharp",
                "resolvedVersion": "4.0.1"
              },
              {
                "id": "Microsoft.NETCore.Platforms",
                "resolvedVersion": "1.1.0"
              },
      ...
            ]
        },
        {
          "framework": "net5.0",
          "topLevelPackages": [ 
              {
                "id": "NuGet.Commands",
                "requestedVersion": "4.8.0-preview3.5278",
                "resolvedVersion": "4.8.0-preview3.5278"
              },
              {
                "id": "Text2Xml.Lib",
                "requestedVersion": "1.1.2",
                "resolvedVersion": "1.1.2"
              }
          ],
          "transitivePackages": [
              {
                "id": "Microsoft.CSharp",
                "resolvedVersion": "4.0.1"
              },
              {
                "id": "Microsoft.NETCore.Platforms",
                "resolvedVersion": "1.1.0"
              },
      ...
            ]
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

#### `> dotnet list package --include-transitive --outdated --framework net5.0`

> The following sources were used:

Reviewer 7: formatting: this section needs to be fenced by triple backticks for consistent formatting

Author: Thank you for your review. Sure, I'll address it shortly.

                "resolvedVersion": "4.8.0-preview3.5278",
                "latestVersion": "6.0.0",
              },
              {
                "id": "Text2Xml.Lib",
                "requestedVersion": "1.1.2",
                "resolvedVersion": "1.1.2",
                "latestVersion": "1.1.4",
              }
            ],
            "transitivePackages": [
              {
                "id": "Microsoft.CSharp",
                "resolvedVersion": "4.0.1",
                "latestVersion": "4.7.0",
              }
      ...
            ]
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

#### `> dotnet list package --include-transitive --deprecated --framework net5.0`

The following sources were used:
   https://api.nuget.org/v3/index.json
   https://apidev.nugettest.org/v3-index/index.json

No packages were found for the project `MyProjectA` given the specified frameworks.
Project `MyProjectB` has the following deprecated packages
   [net5.0]:
   Top-level Package      Requested   Resolved   Reason(s)   Alternative
   > NuGet.Core           2.13.0      2.13.0     Legacy

   Transitive Package          Resolved              Reason(s)   Alternative

>    > NuGet.Packaging.Core      4.8.0-preview3.5278   Legacy      NuGet.Packaging >= 0.0.0

Reviewer 7: Formatting: also need triple-backticks here for consistent formatting

Author: Thank you, just pushed fix commit.

    "https://apidev.nugettest.org/v3-index/index.json"
  ],
  "projects": [
    {
      "path": "src/lib/MyProjectA.csproj",
      "frameworks": [
      ]
    },
    {
      "path": "src/lib/MyProjectB.csproj",
      "frameworks": [
        {
          "framework": "net5.0",
          "topLevelPackages": [ 
              {
                "id": "NuGet.Core",
                "requestedVersion": "2.13.0",
                "resolvedVersion": "2.13.0",
                "deprecationReasons": ["Legacy"]
              }
            ],
            "transitivePackages": [
              {
                "id": "Microsoft.CSharp",
                "resolvedVersion": "4.0.1",
                "deprecationReasons": ["Legacy"],
                "alternativePackage": {
                  "id": "NuGet.Packaging",
                  "versionRange": "[0.0.0,)"
                }
              }
      ...
            ]
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

## Compatibility

We start with `version 1`, as long as we don't remove or rename then it'll be backward compatible. In case [we change version](https://stackoverflow.com/a/13945074) just add new properties, keep old ones even it's not used.

> By default `--format json` will output latest schema version of json, but we can set older version of output like `--output-version 1`, intention behind is we don't want to customer CI build script because sdk/nuget version is upgraded and keep it predictable.

Reviewer 5: Probably want to describe `--output-version` somewhere up explicitly.

Author: Added.

## Out-of-scope

> * We won't support saving the machine-readable output to disk as part of this spec. The work-around is for the consumer to read from the console's stdout stream.

Reviewer 5: Consider simplifying these. 

Ex. 

* Saving the output to disk. 
* Any other additions, such as `--parsable`. 
* License information (link issue if created). 

No need to elaborate too much and it's super straightforward to know what's supported.

* At this point, no other CLI commands (e.g. dotnet list reference) will be within scope for this feature.
"--parsable" option needs separate spec.
* Currently license info is not emitted from any cli command, it could be quite useful, we should consider in the future.

## Rationale and alternatives
Currently, no other `dotnet command` implemented this, this is the 1st time dotnet command implementing `json`(etc) output, so it could become example for others next time they implement.

> Please note, except "tab completion" (for dotnet) part all changes would be inside NuGet.Client repo(under NuGet.Core), and risk of introducing regression is low.(`--format text` refactoring related changes only come into my mind.), no impact on dotnet sdk.

Reviewer 7: I appreciate the time and thought for tab-completion and SDK impact! And many kudos for bringing us in on the ground floor on this effort as well.

  * Direct/top level packages point to dependency packages. >> Could be included, down side is duplicate information, increase json size. Also I feel https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/11553 addresses this issue better, because in the end who transitive dependency brought in is more important than what dependencies exist under each top package.
  * Content hash. >> It's very easy to include it, question is how about source? Related issue https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/11552

* [npm ls --json](https://gist.github.com/erdembayar/ddfbf9c160fbb8a0e31e3596f03ee906), [npm outdated -json](https://gist.github.com/erdembayar/12030f1db89ad9f2e206f2b6ff7d740f) Actually it's less sophisticated than what we have, because it doesn't have multi TFM and projects concept.

## Future Possibilities

If we address them in plain `dotnet list package` then we'll address in `json output` too.

> * Include source info for all  options. https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/11556

Reviewer 5: nit: consider linking like the below bullet points.

> * Include hash + source for package, because same package ID+version might have different hash. It can be used to detect [dependency confusion attack](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/11446#discussion_r767030495), tracking issue: https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/11552

Reviewer 5: Lock files are more appropriate here.  

We should reference them as well.

> * Include hash for each package, sub issue of above. This's low hanging fruit I can include it.

Reviewer 5: I'd remove this, and consider removing phrasing the "can be done" phrasing. It's out of scope and it's not being done :)

* Parse-friendly output. Other package managers like [NPM already have it](https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v7/commands/npm-ls) (`npm ls --parseable` and `npm ls --json`).
* Useful for CI/CD auditing(compliance, security ..)
  * Produce Software Bill of Material (SBOM) (compliance, historic keeping)
  * Enhancing Software Supply Chain Security
    * Check any vulnerable packages
    * Check any deprecated packages
    * Check any outdated packages
  * Check license compliance
  * Resolve dependency issues (detect duplicate packages, newly introduced dependencies, dependency removals, etc.)
  * Making the output machine-readable unlocks additional tooling and automation scenarios in CI/CD pipeline above scenarios.

## Who are the customers

Anyone (government/private enterprises, security experts, individual contributors) who wants to consume `dotnet list package` output for auditing tool or historic keeping, CI/CD orchestrating.

## Solution

In order to solve problem going to introduce 2 new options.

1. `--format` option for all `dotnet list package` commands to ensure formatted(json, text, csv etc) output is emitted to the console.

> 1. `--all` option which works in conjunction with above for that shows all deprecated, vulnerable, and outdated top level and transitive packages. Users can form their own json as a last resort, instead of your team having to respond to every possible user need.

Reviewer 5: I think this is scope creep, and should not be a part of this spec. 

The intention of --outdated  conflicts to that of --vulnerable and --deprecated. 

https://github.com/NuGet/Home/wiki/Deprecate-packages#dotnet-list-package---outdated---deprecated

Author: Reverted.

  ...
        ]
      },
      {
        "framework": "net5.0",
        "topLevelPackages": [ 
          {
            "id": "NuGet.Commands",
            "requestedVersion": "4.8.0-preview3.5278",
            "resolvedVersion": "4.8.0-preview3.5278"
          },
          {
            "id": "Text2Xml.Lib",
            "requestedVersion": "1.1.2",
            "resolvedVersion": "1.1.2"
          }
        ],
        "transitivePackages": [
          {
            "id": "Microsoft.CSharp",
            "resolvedVersion": "4.0.1"
          },
          {
            "id": "Microsoft.NETCore.Platforms",
            "resolvedVersion": "1.1.0"
          },
  ...
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

#### `--all` option

Ability to use new `--all` option in conjunction with `--format` option shows all deprecated, vulnerable, and outdated top level and transitive packages. Users can form their own json as a last resort, instead of your team having to respond to every possible user need.  It would result in if `[--deprecated],[--include-transitive],[--outdated],[--vulnerable]` are combined, currently options '--outdated', '--deprecated' and '--vulnerable' cannot be combined on cli.

> 

Author: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8766776/145881197-d6ee5b58-55db-4828-a384-2c39b2b34142.png)
IDK, why it's designed that way for cli.
